Powerpoint presentations are great tool for communication - they effectively convey a clear message, dashboards on the other had are excellent tools for decision-making - they allow the researcher to answer the probe and challenge their assumptions to arrive at an exact answer.

Presentations are the final outcome of a research study. While they present a valid viewpoint, they are limited to the particular condition, gene selection or annotation that a particular researcher considered valuable. Dashboards are a decision making tool - they allow us to see how the conclusions may differ, if the underlying assumptions used to analayse the data are changed. While dealing with high-dimensional biology - multimodal imaging, single-cell omics, longitudinal clinical data - this ability is extremely crucial since it is rare for a single individual to be well-versed in disparate, highly-technical areas of biology. Coming to a conclusion after considering alternative viewpoints, helps researchers to arrive at a more robust conclusion - they can choose which pathway, gene cluster, threshold to prioritize. 

Presentations have to be re-made every time a different conclusion is drawn from the data. Biology is highly collaborative and it is extremely common for researchers to consider many different viewpoints. Dashboards allow us to consider many different viewpoints without having to re-write the code each time. Tools like filters, sliders, checkboxes, radio buttons, text inputs, select drop downs, date pickers allow the researcher to stress-test their conclusions before investing more time and money to pursue a specific kind of wet-lab experiment.

Presentations do not have the ability to absorb changes in data in real time. This limitation is especially important in areas like genomics where massive amounts are generated every day and crippling for collaborative research teams located in different labs. Dashboards display live data by pulling information from APIs, databases and real-time data sources. This allows for decision-making based on the most current information and enables teams in disparate locations to be updated about the developments as they occur.  

Presentations are infamous for being too crowded with information - we have all suffered through PowerPoint slides where the text is only visible under a microscope. Dashboards are layered - so they elegantly hide the same (or even deeper level of data) underneath a broadly defined, clean layout. They truly are a great way to balance substance and form making it something that is pretty while being deeply informative.

Presentations have visualizations that depend on the computational expertise of the researcher. Dashboards do the heavy lifting of embedding the code in the layout so that biologists can focus on the things that they care about most - the underlying biology - and can use simple tools like sliders, dropdowns and filters to sift through the data.

In conclusion, powerpoints are passive, inert objects that present data from a singular point of view. Dashboards are interactive, constantly evolving, active interfaces that allow for collaborative research on multi-dimensional data. They encourage curiosity instead of conformity, give scientists a chance to virtually explore before committing to a path and help the team draw conclusions after satiating their curiosity about all the possible angles from which to analyse the data.
